Foreign
[Music] I'm Norman Wildberger, and
I'm going to be extending this novel
arithmetic of ours based on multi-sets,
what we might call box arithmetic,
in the direction of negative numbers,
which we got at by introducing anti-msets,
a rather novel arithmetical feature that
somehow mysteriously parallels the world
of modern 20th-century particle physics with
the particle-antiparticle duality or symmetry
that seems to pervade the physical world.
Perhaps something parallel to that actually
sits at the heart of mathematics as well, even
though it hasn't really been explored very much.
Today, we're going to have a closer look at all
this interesting arithmetic with some examples.
So let me just remind you that the setup is
that we're starting now with our zero world
consisting of two objects, not a single zero which
is the empty mset, but also the anti-zero denoted
with the same notation but with a superscript
'a'. I'm also going to introduce some possible
variants that we could use in some situations,
one being just to replace the black bounding
brackets with red bounding brackets, parallel
to what an accountant would do in terms of
black and red representing positive and negative
assets and liabilities. Perhaps when we're using
a typed situation with just on a line, we could
also introduce braces, just a suggestion to
give us an alternate way
of representing anti-msets.
Then we had these two very identical tables
for the addition and multiplication: zero plus
zero is zero, zero plus anti-zero is anti-zero,
and exactly the same for multiplication.
Curiously, especially here, this gives us this
unusual law that zero times anti-zero is anti-zero
rather than zero, which contradicts our experience
that zero times anything is always zero. This
makes us a little bit uneasy; this is certainly a
different kind of arithmetic than we're used to.
As some viewers point out, this can also lead to
a failure of the distributive law at this very
elementary level with just zeros and anti-zeros.
For example, if we look at zero plus zero times
anti-zero, well, zero plus zero is zero, so
that's going to be exactly this: we're going to
get anti-zero. But on the other hand, if we look
at zero times anti-zero plus zero times anti-zero,
this one's an anti-zero, this one's an anti-zero,
and according to this, the sum is then going to be
zero. So the usual distributive law, just at the
level of these zero objects, is not going to be
valid. Now, that does not mean that the actual
arithmetic that we're primarily interested in,
having to do with numbers and poly numbers
and multi-numbers, etc., is also necessarily
inconsistent, but it just means that we do have to
be rather careful about questions of the logical
structure of things. Ultimately, we want proofs
and perhaps models of this that will ensure that
what we're doing is logically consistent. At this
stage here, it's exploratory, and in that spirit,
we're going to give you some examples today
of these anti-msets that are built up from
this anti-zero, and also then negative numbers
and then intervals, integral poly numbers, and
integer polynumbers, extending the negativity into
the world of poly numbers. In some sense, this is
like an assembly language approach to arithmetic,
you know, we're going really right down to a sort
of fundamental level here and uncovering structure
that's a little bit unfamiliar, even though it
does lead to pretty familiar arithmetic, but we
get to look at that arithmetic in a new light.
Last time, we saw that as a consequence of
having anti-zero, we should probably extend this
anti-notion to msets very generally, so that
for any mset or object M in this arithmetic,
there is going to be an anti-object, which
we denote by m superscript 'a', which has
the property that if M and anti-M are together
in an mset, then they cancel out just like an
electron and a positron, and we just get an empty
mset as a result. We also saw that this m-a,
this anti-M, can be evaluated by essentially
adding the anti-zero to M in either order. In
particular, this shows that the anti of anti-zero
is zero. Extending that sort of black-red approach
to notation, let me suggest that we could use
the following sort of two-dimensional version
of that. So if here's an mset M, okay, it's a box
with a couple of boxes in it. This is an empty
box, and this box here has two empty boxes in it.
This would be what we would usually call one plus
alpha squared in polynumber language if we
wrote it out in terms of linear structure.
There's a big mset with an empty mset there,
and here's an mset with two msets inside it.
If we were looking at this mset and trying to
understand its anti-object, so M superscript 'a',
then I propose that we could denote that with a
red bounding box. So we take this thing here and
we copy it essentially, with the distinction
that the outside box, the containing box,
is now red instead of black, but the interior
things are just the same as they were over here.
In the linear case, that would involve
replacing these outside brackets with red
brackets instead of black brackets, but
crucially, what's inside stays the same.
If we didn't have colors at our disposal, we
could replace these red brackets with, say,
braces or whatever else we wanted to use.
I like this two-dimensional representation
because our minds are very much oriented to
two-dimensional visualization and understanding,
and so this makes demonstrating things a little
bit easier for us. If we have something too
complicated like this, it's fine for an AI or
a computer, but our physiology prefers to see
things in this form here. So this is actually
quite a useful way of illustrating some things.
The first use of these anti-objects is to
define minus one, or I like to write one
bar. So one bar, or minus one, is the
mset consisting of a single anti-zero,
and it has the property that if you add one
bar with one, then you're going to get a zero
or the empty set. The multiplication of one and
one bar follows this sort of familiar pattern,
and then we can extend this negation to
natural numbers. So if N is a natural number,
then we can define N-bar, or minus N, to be one
bar times N. That then introduces an extension
of our fundamental objects from natural numbers
to integers. So we create integers by multiplying
natural numbers by minus one. Now we have a wider
framework, and it's really this wider framework
that is a very pleasant environment with lots
of interesting applications. Furthermore, if we
have a more general mset, a pure mset M, then we
can define its negative also, M-bar or minus M,
exactly in the same way: we just multiply by one
bar. I remind you that in this world we can always
add and we can always multiply msets. There's
no requirement that these things necessarily be
numbers; those are just the top-level things,
but there's a whole range of different,
more complicated kinds of objects, and these
operations extend to all of them. We also saw that
another way of thinking about this M-bar was that
it consists of the mset whose elements are the
antis of all the elements of capital M. So it's
the mset of M-a as M ranges through capital M.
Let's do some examples of some
simple integer arithmetic:
two plus one bar plus four bar. Well, two is the
mset consisting of zero zero, one bar is the mset
consisting of just the single anti-zero, and four
bar is anti-zero anti-zero anti-zero anti-zero.
When we add them, we just dump
everything out into a single mset,
so we get zero zero anti-zero here and
then a bunch of anti-zeros further,
and then once we have them all in an mset, the
zeros and the anti-zeros will mutually annihilate
each other. So say that pair will disappear and
that pair will disappear, and we're left just
with anti-zero anti-zero anti-zero, which
we recognize as three bar or minus three.
What about three times two bar? Well, three
is zero zero zero, and two bar is anti-zero
anti-zero. How do we multiply these? Well, we have
to form the big mset consisting of all possible
sums of elements here with elements here. So we
have to be able to evaluate zero plus anti-zero,
which we know is anti-zero, and there are going to
be six possible such things, so we're going to get
that thing, which we recognize as six bar.
Let's illustrate the fact that multiplication, and
in fact addition also, are not essentially binary
operations in this world; they, in principle, are
things that can input a whole bunch of things at
the same time. Let's multiply two bar times
four bar times one bar. So that's anti-zero
anti-zero, there's two bar, multiplied by
anti-zero anti-zero anti-zero anti-zero,
there's four bar, multiplied by
just anti-zero, that's one bar.
So what are we going to have to do? We're going
to have to take an mset that consists of all
possible sums of elements here, elements here,
and elements here. So I'm going to take one of
these anti-zeros, one of these anti-zeros, and
one of these anti-zeros. We're going to add them,
so over here on the side, let's just compute this
thing: anti-zero plus anti-zero plus anti-zero.
Anti-zero plus anti-zero is zero, and zero plus
anti-zero is anti-zero, so this just gives us
anti-zero. In fact, more generally, if
we had K anti-zeros all added together,
then whether we get zero or anti-zero as the final
result depends on whether K is even or odd. If
there's an odd number of anti-zeros, we're going
to get an anti-zero. If there's an even number
of anti-zeros, we're going to get a zero. Because
the addition and the multiplication tables are the
same, that's the same statement if we replace the
additions here with multiplications. So anti-zero
times anti-zero times anti-zero is also going
to be anti-zero. It's clear what we're going
to get here: we are going to get a whole bunch
of anti-zeros, a whole bunch of them, one, two,
three, four, five, six, seven, eight,
and so the final result is eight bar.
Now we can convince ourselves that
the arithmetic that we've cooked up
here really does obey the same rules as our usual
integer arithmetic with respect to the
operations addition and multiplication.
Let's go down one level to the poly numbers.
I remind you that a poly number is an mset of
natural numbers. Let's look at an example. Here's
an mset of natural numbers: P is the mset 0 0 2
2 5. These are all natural numbers, and this has
an interpretation in terms of more usual notation
as 2 plus 3 alpha squared plus alpha to the five.
If we connect with my usual preferred notation
for poly numbers, like we use in the algebraic
calculus course or that we've talked about
extensively in the Math Foundation series,
we can think of a poly number like a polynomial
as a list, a vertical list, say, typically of
coefficients. The actual variable itself is sort
of secondary; it's sort of implicit. It's really
the coefficients that are the crucial thing.
So here, there's a two, there's zero alphas,
three alpha squares, zero alpha cubed, zero
alpha to the fourth, one alpha to the fifth.
Let me just point out again the important
distinction here between this more classical
approach to what a poly number is, namely as
a list, and this new point of view, this mset
point of view towards what a poly number is. These
are closely connected in the sense that this thing
here is really the multiplicity list for this
mset. This is keeping track of how many of each
of these objects we have because the objects
appearing here are naturally ordered; they're
natural numbers, so 0, 1, 2, 3, etc. We can encode
this information just sort of by counting how many
zeros there are, how many ones there are, how many
twos there are, how many threes there are, etc.
But there's a sense in which this is actually
a more basic or fundamental object because the
ambiguity that's appearing over here,
that you're allowed to add additional
zeros below wherever you are and it doesn't
change, is sort of removed at the multi-set
level because we don't have to say that
we're just talking about a multi-set.
This is a subtle but important shift
that I do want you to take on board,
that perhaps a poly number is really more
fundamentally an mset of natural numbers.
Now we want to enlarge that view
because now we have integers.
Let's see what happens if we extend this notion to
involve integers. Here's the negation of this P.
How do we negate an mset of P-bar or minus P?
Well, we just take the anti of each one of these.
So we have zero anti, or anti-zero, anti-zero,
anti-two, anti-two, anti-two, anti-five.
That's also a poly number, a familiar kind
of poly number, but one involving negative
coefficients. So if we wrote it out as a poly
number in alpha, it would be two bar plus
three bar alpha squared. So there's really three
alpha squares here, but there's antis here,
so it's representing three bar alpha squared and
one bar alpha to the five. As a vertical list,
we could write minus two, zero, minus three,
zero, zero, minus one, or I prefer two bar,
zero, three bar, zero, zero, one bar. Notice also
that I'm putting the one bar here. We're sort of
forced to here because we don't have a subtraction
operation, so it would be wrong for us to say
minus alpha to the five. Not wrong, but not really
consistent with what we're doing so far. So far,
we really only have addition and multiplication,
so strictly speaking, to be consistent,
we probably also should put a one here. It's
probably a little bit more consistent if we
treat all these things sort of uniformly and treat
the ones the same as the twos and the threes. I
suppose we could even go one step further and
write zeros, zero alpha, etc., but that would
be going a bit too far. Anyway, this is the
negation of this thing here in an obvious way.
We're also allowed to mix and match these things,
so we can have a situation where we have a poly
number which has both positive and negative
coefficients. For example, this Q thing here.
Have a look at it: it's mset 0 1-a, or anti-one,
2-a, and 3. As a poly number, this would be, well,
there's a single one, there's a one to the
a here, so that's like one bar times alpha,
and there's a one bar times alpha squared,
and there's a one bar times alpha cubed.
What would happen if we added, say, P and Q? Well,
we have to put them all together in a big mset. So
there's a zero here, a zero here, and a zero,
so there'll be three zeros. There's a one, an a,
there's a two, two, two. We'll put two, two, two
in, and we also have to put a 2-a in, an anti-two,
but that 2-a is going to cancel with one of
the twos. So they're going to go, so we're just
going to have two, two, and then we'll get a three
and also a five. So the result would be three
plus one bar alpha plus two alpha squared
plus one alpha cubed. If we wanted to,
plus one alpha to the five. More colloquially,
we would write this or say it as three minus
alpha plus two alpha squared plus alpha
cubed plus alpha to the five. That would
be the more familiar sort of high school
way of saying it, but that does assume that
we have a subtraction operation which we're
not assuming at this point. So that's the way
anti-numbers generate negative coefficients. It's
the antis inside the brackets that are generating
negatives sort of outside the brackets.
Maybe that's one way of thinking about it.
Great, so let's do a little bit of multiplicative
arithmetic with these integer polynumbers.
Say 2 plus alpha times 3 minus
alpha squared. First of all,
let's over here just draw a picture
of this thing. What is 2 plus alpha?
It's a box that has what in it? Well, it's going
to have two empty msets, so we just had that,
that would be the number two, but it also has
an alpha in it. What's an alpha? An alpha is
when you put a one inside this box
here. So 2 plus alpha looks like this.
Now we're multiplying it by 3 minus
alpha squared. What does that look like?
Well, that's also a box, and it has a three in
it. So it's the three zeros in there that makes
the three, and then there's a minus alpha
squared. What does that look like? Well,
an alpha squared would be like when you had
a box here with two empty boxes inside. But
we have a minus alpha squared, so I actually need
to change colors and introduce a red box because
we have a minus alpha squared. So I'm going to put
a box here and a box here. Have a look at this.
If we didn't have this thing here, if we removed
those three things and just looked at this big
black box with a red box inside it and two black
marks, this would be the negation of the thing
that we got by replacing this red box with a black
box. If we replace the red box with a black box,
then we would have alpha squared. Negative
alpha squared, you get that by taking this
thing here and changing the color of all the
ingredients. In other words, replacing all
the ingredients with antis. So the minus alpha
squared is represented by this big box with a
red box inside it containing two black boxes.
We could do the arithmetic at the box level.
Let's do it in a more
regular fashion. 2 plus alpha
is an mset; it's a poly number, so it's
an mset of natural numbers, or these days,
integers. So 2 is represented by zero zero,
and the alpha is represented by the one.
We have to multiply it. Here's another mset
consisting of what? Well, there are three zeros
in it, and then there's a minus alpha squared.
That's like a two; we're sort of representing
alpha squared, but we have to put an anti-two
there because we have a minus one of them.
Let's see if we can do this calculation. There
are quite a lot of terms here. There's three
times four, so it'll be 12 things altogether.
So what do we have to do in order to multiply
these two things? We have to take all possible
sums. So zero plus zero is zero, so I'm going
to do zero times only, so I get zero zero zero
two, and I'm just adding zero to all of these.
I have to do the same thing with
this zero, add zero to all of these.
Now I have to do the same thing with this one,
add one to all of these. One plus zero is one,
and one plus two alpha, so that's interesting
here. We need to calculate over here,
perhaps in a different color.
So what is one plus two a?
Two a, another way of thinking about that is
it's one plus two plus anti-zero, right? So
anti, the anti of two. One way of saying what that
is, it's two plus anti-zero. So if we write it
this way and sort of we use distributivity,
we would get three plus anti-zero, which is
anti-three. So according to that
calculation, we should have a three-a there.
In terms of an actual poly
number, what poly number is this?
We get six zero, so that's six. We have these
three ones here, so that's like three alpha,
and then we have these two two-a's or anti-twos.
So that's like alpha squared, but with a minus,
so minus two alpha squared, and there's three-a.
Anti-three corresponds to minus alpha cubed.
Does that look like what we'd expect?
Two times three, three times alpha,
yes, minus two alpha squared,
yes, and minus alpha cubed.
Let's do another example, say one minus alpha
cubed. That's going to be what? Well, one minus
alpha as an mset in the more familiar way, that's
a zero representing the one, and the minus alpha
is like a one but with an 'a' here, anti-one.
So times zero, anti-one, times zero, anti-one.
We're going to get an mset consisting of all
possible triple sums: element here, element here,
element here, adding them up. There'll be a zero
plus zero plus zero, that'll be one, and then
there'll be a zero plus zero plus one-a, and then
there'll be a zero plus one-a plus zero. There'll
be a zero plus one-a plus one-a, that's four of
them, and then with the one-a, so one-a plus zero
plus zero, one-a plus zero plus one-a, one-a plus
one-a plus zero, and one-a plus one-a plus one-a.
What are we going to get when we do all this?
The first thing here is zero plus zero plus zero,
that's going to be zero. What's this thing
here, zero plus one-a? That's going to be one-a,
and in fact, so is that, and so is that, and
so is that. So we're going to get one-a, and so
is this one, so it'll be one-a, one-a, one-a.
So I dealt with this one here, this one here,
this one here, and this one here. What about
this thing here, zero plus one-a plus one-a?
What is one-a plus one-a? Anti-one plus anti-one,
let's do a little sum over here. So anti-one plus
anti-one. One way of thinking about what
an anti-one is, it's one plus anti-zero,
so maybe we could write it like this.
That makes it clear that this is two
plus anti-zero. Plus anti-zero is zero, so we're
getting two. So anti-one plus anti-one is two.
It's the same kind of story with the
parity; there's an even number of antis,
so we're getting something that doesn't involve
antis. This thing here is going to give us a two,
as is this one, and this one. Oh sorry, not
plus, just a single two, and also another two,
and another two. Finally, this last one here,
three-one plus three-one plus three-one,
same kind of story, but we're
getting a three with an anti.
If we wanted to write that out as a
poly number, let's squeeze it down here,
maybe in blue. This is one, there's three of these
one-a, so that's minus three alpha, there's three
of these, so plus three alpha squared, and there's
one of these, so minus a single alpha cubed.
So we've done a little binomial
expansion in this mset world,
but now we're able to move in a different
direction, still staying in the world of
poly numbers, but we're going to use the fact
that we have integers now in a more subtle,
more expanding fashion. This leads us to what
we're going to call integral polynumbers,
or perhaps one could say Laurent poly numbers,
but I'm not going to actually use that notation;
I'm going to prefer integral poly numbers. An
integral poly number is an mset of integers.
A poly number, we said before, was an mset
of natural numbers like zeros, ones, twos,
etc. Now an mset of integers.
For example, here P, here's an mset
of integers, negative 2, negative 1,
negative 1, negative 1, zero, three, three.
We can now interpret this in an algebraic fashion
by being sort of consistent and thinking of these
negative sizes just representing powers of
alpha which have negative numbers as exponents.
So this two-bar here is giving us an alpha to the
minus two. These things here, these one-bars, are
alpha to the minus one. There's three of them. The
single zero is a one, and these two alpha cubes,
these two threes, give us two alpha cubed. In
terms of a box, here's a box that corresponds
to this. There's a box, and it has a two-bar in
it. Where's the two-bar? Well, this thing here
is essentially the two-bar because a two would
look like a box, a black box with two empty boxes
inside it. If we want to negate that, what we have
to do is we have to take the mset which consists
of the antis of all the ingredients. So we have to
take the antis of the two involved here. This is
what the two-bar looks like, and similarly,
the one-bars here, that one, that one,
and that one, are represented by a black box with
a red box inside. The zero is just represented
with the single empty set, and the threes,
well, there's three, and there's another three.
In terms of our familiar notation for msets,
if we just look at the positive part of this,
maybe I should put it down a little bit.
Let me write it like this. So we just looked
at the positive part; there's a single
one. There's a zero alphas, zero alpha
squared, and there's two alpha cubes.
So that would be our usual poly number
representation as a multiplicity list
with just positive powers of alpha. But now we
have also three alpha to the minus ones and an
alpha to the minus two. We can represent that
by essentially going in this other direction,
going up from this bar here. So there's three here
in this position and one here in this position.
This is sort of the alpha to the zero
position, alpha to the one, alpha to the two,
alpha to the three. This is alpha to the
minus one, here's alpha to the minus two.
This is sort of consistent with what we're doing
previously, but we're kind of going in a different
direction. In my next video, I'm going to have to
say more about how to think about these integral
polynomials, like what do they mean, how do we
represent them, or how do we think about them.
Let's just do a bit of arithmetic with them to
give us an idea of how this works. Let's add
two integral poly numbers. Here's an integral poly
number, one-bar, one-bar, two. Here's another one,
three-bar, one, two, four. To add them, we just
make a big mset, dump everything together. So
there's a one-bar, there's a one-bar, there's
a two, there's a three-bar, there's a one,
there's a two, there's a four. We could rewrite
this in maybe a slightly more organized fashion,
like this: one-bar, one-bar, one, two,
two. Oh, there's a three-bar, so we could
put maybe the three-bar there. Three-bar,
one-bar, one-bar, one, two, two, and four.
In terms of interpretation in terms of poly
numbers, this would be here. This would be two
alpha to the minus one plus alpha squared, that
thing there. This thing here would be an alpha to
the minus three plus an alpha plus alpha squared
plus alpha to the four. What are we getting out of
this? We're getting an alpha to the minus three
plus two alpha to the minus one plus alpha plus
two alpha squared plus alpha to the four. Does
that sound reasonable? Yes, I think it does.
Here's another example, a little bit more
sophisticated now because we're going to
combine these two roles of negative
numbers in slightly different ways.
Have a look at this thing here:
three-bar, one-bar, two, anti-one-bar,
anti-zero, two, three. First of all, let me
express the meaning of this in more familiar
sort of poly number language. What is this thing
representing? It's representing the poly number
alpha to the minus three plus alpha to the minus
one. Without the ant here, it would be an alpha
square, but there's an anti here, so we have
to think of it as being minus alpha squared.
What about this one over here? The one-bar anti,
so one-bar is representing alpha to the minus one,
but we have an anti, so it's minus alpha to the
minus one plus one plus alpha squared plus alpha
cubed. When we put them all together, let's do
it over here. We just dump them all together:
three-bar, one-bar, two, anti-one-bar,
anti-zero, two, three. What is that?
There's some cancellation that happens
because in the same mset we're seeing
some objects and their antis. There's a
one-bar here, and there's an anti-one-bar;
they're going to cancel. There's a two
and an anti-two; they're going to cancel.
The three-bar and the three, they are
not antis; they're not going to cancel,
they stay where they are. So we're going to get
a three-bar. What do we say? These guys cancel,
these guys cancel. We're going to get a zero and
a three. So over here on the polynomial side,
we should be getting alpha to the minus three plus
one plus alpha cubed. I suppose that's reasonable.
Let's do a multiplication: two-bar,
one, times one-bar, one-bar, anti-three.
In terms of polynomials or poly numbers, this
would be, this one here is like alpha to the
minus two plus alpha times two alpha to the minus
one plus three anti, that's minus alpha cubed.
At the level here, what do we have to do?
We have to make a big mset consisting of all
possible sums of these things, all possible
sums. So two-bar plus one-bar, what is that?
Two-bar is the same as minus two, one-bar
is the same as minus one. When we add them,
we're going to get minus three or three-bar.
So we're going to get a three-bar,
that's sum. This sum is another three-bar. We get
two-bar plus three-anti. Let's think about that.
Maybe I could do that over here. Two-bar plus
three-anti. The three-anti you can think of as
three plus anti-zero. When we do it that way,
the two-bar plus the three will give us a one,
so we get one plus anti-zero, which is one-anti.
Which one was that? That was this two-bar plus
three-anti. Again, sort of an odd number of antis
gives us an anti, but otherwise, it's like two-bar
plus three, so it's like one, so we're getting
one-anti. We've done three sums so
far. We have still one plus one-bar,
well, that's zero, one plus one-bar,
that's zero, and one plus three-anti,
that's the same story as that. The one
plus three is four, so we get four-anti.
What is this telling us? We should be getting
two alpha to the minus three, that a one plus
two plus two a one-anti, so that's minus alpha,
and a four-anti, so minus alpha to the four.
Does that correspond to what we would
expect? Two alpha to the minus three,
minus alpha, yes, two, yes, minus alpha
to the fourth, I think that's right.
So it seems as if we have an interesting
arithmetic, but now we've used these negative
numbers to enlarge our arithmetic or algebra
of polynomials or polynumbers in two ways,
not just in terms of adding negative
coefficients, the possibility of that,
but also in terms of adding the possibility of
negative exponents. This is a departure from
the usual story of polynomials. I'm going
to talk more about that in my next video,
how to think about that. We're going to see some
new insights into what the world of polynomials
and their algebra really looks like. I'm
Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]